Assignment 1: Reflections, ideas, and planning                                                   

Krutarth Patel
Williams 

1.	After listening to my classmates’ reports, I also got some ideas like:
Management app: This app could be designed in such a way that a manager of a work team can assign tasks to respective staff member. Manager and staff members will have different user interface. For example, manager can see all member’s tasks, but staff member can only see his task that need to be finished by the end of his shift. Manager can also ask for a picture as a proof that can also be uploaded on this app. If the task is finished as asked by manager, that staff member gets points. At the need of the month, these points can be used to determine the employee of month and much more. This app can also display schedules, requests for days off, important notes and announcements, etc.
Run Tracking app: Apps like Google maps shows the map and directions. But if a user wants to run for home cardio exercise than Google maps app could not be used. Instead, we can create an app in which user can set the goal of miles, calories, speed, and timings. For example, a user wants to run for 3 miles and at the end, he should be back from where he started. This app can show the directions of roads which have footpath and covers 3 miles in such way that user gets back to the place from where he started. If he puts 5 miles, then app will suggest the route that covers 5 miles of track and ends at starting point. It also calculates calories burn, steps, and can also play songs by linking apps like Spotify. 

2.	A developer deserves to be rewarded for their creativity and efforts for creating an app. There are several apps which are free to download and use. But if user wants to use the upgrade version, then they need to pay. This method can be used. There are also apps where user don’t need to pay and can use every function of apps. For example, Khan Academy. This is a teaching organization which has no in-purchase and subscriptions. Here, they use links to get donations from user if they are satisfied by using this app.

3.	According to me, one of the best apps that offers an excellent user experience by UI/UX integration is Snapchat. I am always amazed with the idea behind it. People can chat with the help of pictures. And these pictures get removed after user sees it. This I sa great idea and thus this app is very successful. This apps offer a variety of widgets and developers has its layout very well architected to help user interact with the app more easily without any kind of documentations.

4.	Last class discussion has helped me better understand and fine-tuned our app idea. We have better understanding than before on the app idea. The most important thing that we must focus on is interactive user interface and make it very user friendly. In one sentence, our idea is to build a social media app like WhatsApp and add the banking feature on it, where user can share money with all group members and friends.
